>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
The Portuguese observatory.
So, Jorge, do you want to
introduce yourself briefly
and then
please get started.
And you are muted.
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
Sorry.
Because the button changed
the position of the mic.
Let me also put
my camera to see me.
Okay.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Jorge Fernandes from
the Portuguese Agency, the
AMA, Administrative
Modernization Agency.
We are responsible for the
monitorization in Portugal
of the web accessibility.
We are the body
responsible for that.
We belong to the Ministry
of the Modernization of
State and Public
Administration.
And, well, I'm working in
the field of web accessibility
since 1999, so in the
beginning of the WCAG 1.0.
And I'm here to present
you the Portuguese observatory.
I think I can
continue now, Shadi?
Okay.
In the -- sorry.
I will try to get the
connection with my slides.
Okay.
Next one.
So in the Portuguese
legislation, we have
explicitly a method of
evaluation mentioned based
in the simplified
method of the directive.
In the preamble of the
Implementation Act about
monitoring, I
underlined these two ideas.
The monitoring should
raise awareness and
encourage learning in
Member States, and the
overall results of the
monitoring activities
should be made
publicly available.
These must involve all entities,
all public sector bodies.
And the monitoring is not
an external exercise to them.
So it's something that they
need to do it by theirselves.
That is one of the reasons
why we in Portugal abide
the centralized model
of evaluation, a method
of three steps to
each entity evaluate.
The simplified method
based on automatic and
semi-automatic tools.
And in that what we call
an in-depth light is a manual
evaluation based on a
checklist that we call the
ten critical aspects of
the functional accessibility,
such a kind of
W3C Easy Check.
And, according to our
legislation, this is
mandatory, these two
references, these two
methods of evaluation,
and is recommended, also,
usability tests with
people with disability
with a minimum of one
task, one users' typology
of the European standards,
like, you know, the EN 301 549.
About the simplified
method, as you know, in
the Implementing Act, the
page sample needs to have
a number of pages
appropriate to the
estimated size and
complexity of the website.
This is the main principle
mentioned in the Directive.
In the Portuguese
proposal, the page sample
is composed by the home
page plus all pages linked
from the home page.
From the historical
studies in Portugal, we
know that this means
about 60 pages per website
in public administration.
Evaluate with automatic
tools to WCAG 2.1 AA.
And the public sector body
can use any kind of tool,
but our team will load
all the samples in the
Portuguese observatory,
and all of them is public.
All our tools used same
engine, the QualWeb, that
already Carlos mentioned.
We have the AccessMonitor.
That is a tool
that produced a web
accessibility
report of one page.
That is also
in our website.
And the observatory is an
awareness tool with global
statistics of
the entities.
If the entity want
to know more details,
they need MyMonitor.
So the observatory don't
give the detail of the
information -- all
information of the sample.
To do that, the entities
need to have -- to have
access to another tool.
That is the MyMonitor.
So we give them the
MyMonitor, and, of course,
we include our contact
network of people that is
working in the field.
So the impact of the
ACT Rules in our tools.
Until now we change 20
of 80 of our tests based
in 13 ACT Rules.
Get a more comprehensive
analysis, a post-processing
browser analysis, see more
-- at the moment, our tool
see more HTML elements.
Our tool is also ready to
translate to other languages.
The output is in
EARL and the CSV format.
We can output all the
results in these two formats.
The tools are open source.
All the source
are in the GitHub.
You can find them at
the amagovpt.github.io/eed.
It is the local where
you found the source code.
So the biggest impact of
the WAI-Tools Project are
in the test rules.
Just to mention two examples,
the headings and the images
that we already spoke
in this presentation today.
Well, talking about the
headings, in the past we
have headings as
traditional H1 to H6.
We detect that.
Now we detect more
headings because we have
the traditional ones
and the new ones that
I mention here
has an ARIA-like.
We have the attribute role
heading in conjunction with
the attribute level
with 1 to 6 and maybe more
headings with more levels.
So all of them at the
moment are detected by our tool.
About the images, in the
past, we only analyzed the
alt of the images.
Now we have four different
attributes where we can
put also the alternative
text, the ARIA-labelledby, the
ARIA-label, the alt, and also
when we use the title alone.
If you want to try all the
ACT Rules that we have at
the moment, you can check
-- you can check the QualWeb.
That is in
qualweb.di.fc.ul.pt.
So qualweb.di.fc.ul.pt.
And there you can try all
the 67 -- 67 rules that we
have at the moment
from the branch of 70.
So let's try a demo
of the observatory.
And now is the moment
of David Attenborough.
I will put
running a video.
Let me try.
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
Let's try a demo
of the observatory.
The observatory is
organized from the big
picture until the
drill down of one entity.
So the first page of
the observatory have
the big picture.
Global score from 1 to 10.
Ten is a good practice.
Total number of
categories, total number
of websites, pages,
a ranking table of the
categories with the number
of pages conformed by level.
We started by
entering the 308 Portuguese
municipalities with the
sample home page plus all
pages linked
to the home page.
We have more than 50,000
pages introduced at the moment.
We have data graphics as
histogram of scores and
the ten most
frequent errors.
Let's go now to a
category, for example, the
category of the
municipalities.
Second level, the level of
category or directory, in
this case, the
municipalities.
The same organization of
the first level with the
score, the statistical
graphics, the total number
of websites, the
ranking table of entities.
Let's see the
municipality of Murca.
The average score of 9.9,
the total number of pages,
243, three pages
conform with level A, and 226
pages conform with AAA.
It's a good one.
Let's see the Murca
municipality in detail
in the third level.
Again, the same
organization of data.
Histogram, the ten most
frequent errors, the top
five errors by conformity
level, an accessibility
plot in a radar graphic.
The more full the
circumference is, the better.
And a table with
detailed error distribution.
Work in progress.
An observatory with more
info and with a new look.
The evolution of page
conformity on the left graphic,
the accessibility
plot on the right.
The histogram of scores.
The bad practices, but
also the board of good
practices with the better
practices by WCAG level.
And, also, the detailed
distribution of all the
better practices found.
Let's try a demo
of the observatory.
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
And now I have also a
demonstration of our
accessibility statement
that is made based
on -- in the WAI-Tools
accessibility statement.
We have a crawler to pass
through all websites of
the public administration,
and we can collect information
about the
conformity level of the --
that is mentioned in the
accessibility statement.
And our goal is to collect
all the information because
our accessibility
statement is machine
readable, so it is
possible with a crawler to
get this
information automatically.
And I will show you also
what we can also do with
the machine-readable
reading, for example, an
accessibility statement
already published and use
it to create my
accessibility statement.
Let's see another demo.
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
A demo of the Portuguese
statement generator.
Technically the
Portuguese generator is based
on the WAI-Tools generator.
Imagine that you are
navigating in the ePortugal,
the citizen
portal of Portugal.
And you want to found
the accessibility statement.
You know that if you use
the suffix "accessibility"
in the URL, "acessibilidade"
in Portuguese, it is supposed
to find the
accessibility statement.
And here it is, the
accessibility statement,
with the references of the
analysis done, following
the model of the directive
and the Portuguese legislation.
At the bottom of all
statements, we found a
link to the
generator used to do it.
My goal is to create the
accessibility statement
to my website.
I can use the
button "upload by URL."
I can create my
accessibility statement based
on the one of ePortugal.
I enter the URL of
ePortugal statement page,
I press OK, and is done.
And I have the form
with all the data of the
ePortugal
accessibility statement.
Now I change the data
according to my organization
and website, press the
button "Preview and Download,"
and the statement is
already with my data.
Well, more or less,
because in this demo I
only change one field,
the name of the organization.
Then I press the
button "Download HTML."
I got the HTML format.
Only the structure of the
document, not the styles.
I copy paste this
HTML code to my website.
And when I did that, my
accessibility statement
got the style of my site,
and everything is in place.
And we got another
accessibility statement
machine readable, in this
case, based on the ePortugal.
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
Okay, so a demo of the
Portuguese
statement generator again.
At the moment, we --
with the crawler, it is
possible from data from
today we know that we have
32 accessibility statements.
We do 16 compliant, eight
partially compliant, and
eight no compliant is
some of the data that it
is possible to get
automatically from the
accessibility statement.
So if you want to see
live the Portuguese
observatory, you
can use the URL
observatorio.acessibilidade.
gov.pt.
So observatorio,
O-B-S-E-R-V-A-T-O-R-I-O.
And that's it
for my presentation.
Thank you very much.
>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
Thank you, Jorge.
Yeah, so, actually, we
have a question right away.
The question is --
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
Don't say.
Yes.
>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
If we want to install the
testing service to our own
server, do we need -- oop,
and I moved -- do we need
the QualWeb core in GitHub
only, or what is the
purpose of the monitor-service,
et cetera, repos
in ama.gov.pt repos?
So this is a bit of
a technical question.
>> JORGE FERNANDES: Yeah,
maybe Carlos can help me.
>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
About the installation of this.
Somebody wants
to use it locally.
Carlos?
>> CARLOS DUARTE:
Yeah, sure.
I can help, definitely.
You don't need to install
any QualWeb-related service
to have the observatory
and the tools in the
observatory
ecosystem working.
The monitor server that
you mentioned in that
question includes
the QualWeb core.
So everything that
requires an accessibility
evaluation is handled
through the monitor
server, which is also
tasked with translating
the outcomes of QualWeb
into the formats that the
tools in the PT
observatory ecosystem use.
So everything that you
need to have your own copy
of this ecosystem
is available from the
AMA GitHub repository.
>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
Right.
So that's one particular
aspect is that this entire
observatory and all the
tools are completely open
source, and I'm sure they
welcome contributions as well.
Now, Jorge, another
question was: I don't
understand why a new
accessibility statement
can be made by copying a
published -- an existing
accessibility statement.
Can you please clarify?
>> JORGE FERNANDES:
Yeah, you know, one of the
things in the -- when
you need to fulfill the
accessibility statement
is to understand what is in
different parts
of the statement.
So when you can visualize
a final declaration already
full field, we know
that this help also to
adapt and to fulfill
our own declaration.
So it's something that it
is helpful to do that, and
it is also when
you already have the
declaration in your
website and want to do
changes, you need -- you
also can use the same method
that I used here in
the demo to make changes
of your own declaration.
So it is a question
of it's more easier to
understand how to fulfill
the new declaration and
also help to modify
our own declaration.